JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The
post-Labor
Day election countdown begins.
Tonight, I talk with Democratic
vice presidential
nominee Tim Kaine about the
tightening race,
national security and Hillary
Clinton's strategy
to win voters' trust.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Tuesday: In
a historic visit, President
Obama apologizes
to the people of Laos, and
pledges to help
the nation heal after the U.S.
dropped 290
million bombs there, an average
of eight a
minute, from 1964 to 1973.
GWEN IFILL: And the rapidly
changing fight
against terrorism 15 years after
9/11.
NICK RASMUSSEN, Director,
National Counterterrorism
Center: The work we're doing now
with our
partners in the intelligence
community often
doesn't involve really, really
sensitive intelligence.
It involves looking at Twitter.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hillary Clinton
and Donald
Trump traded new jabs today amid
polls showing
the presidential race has
tightened.
Clinton said there are growing
questions about
Trump's ethics, and she linked
them to his
refusal to release his tax
returns.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I'm going to continue to raise
this, because
I think it's a fundamental issue
about him
in this campaign, that we're
going to talk
about in one way or another for
the next 62
days, because he clearly has
something to
hide.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Later, in Tampa,
Florida, Clinton
charged that Trump's policies
would lead the
nation back to war in the Middle
East.
In turn, Trump released an open
letter of
support from 88 retired generals
and admirals.
And in Virginia Beach, Virginia,
he belittled
Clinton's argument that she'd be
tougher on
the likes of Russia.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Putin looks at her and he
laughs.
OK?
He laughs.
Putin.
Putin looks at Hillary Clinton
and he smiles.
Boy, would he like to see her.
That would be easy, because just
look at her
decisions.
Look how bad her decisions have
been.
Virtually every decision she's
made has been
a loser.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clinton and Trump
will appear
separately in a nationally
televised forum
on national security tomorrow
night.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: Congress
returned from its August recess
with a full
to-do list.
House Speaker Paul Ryan said the
priority
is to finance the government
past October
1, when the fiscal year begins.
There's also pressure to approve
money for
fighting the Zika virus.
And it all has to get done in
about three
weeks, before lawmakers head
home for the
final dash to Election Day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
was in the
Asian nation of Laos today,
attending a regional
summit and pledging to heal
scars from the
Vietnam War.
He's the first sitting American
president
to visit Laos, and he cited a
moral obligation
to help the country recover from
heavy U.S.
bombing.
The president also met with
South Korea's
president at the summit, a day
after North
Korea test-fired more missiles.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
We are going to work diligently
together with
the most recent U.N. sanctions
that are already
placing North Korea under the
most intense
sanctions regime ever.
We are going to work together to
make sure
that we're closing loopholes and
making them
even more effective.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, the
U.N. Security
Council strongly condemned the
North Korean
missile tests and threatened new
sanctions.
GWEN IFILL: Security forces in
Afghanistan
ended a standoff today, killing
three Taliban
gunmen who seized a building in
Kabul.
That left crews to clean up from
a bombing
that began the 11-hour siege.
The target was a building
housing the aid
group CARE International.
It all happened hours after twin
bombings
elsewhere in Kabul that killed
35 people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, one of
the biggest for-profit college
chains, ITT
Technical institute, is closing
all of its
130 U.S. campuses.
The announcement today affects
some 35,000
students.
Last month, the U.S. Department
of Education
banned ITT from accepting new
students who
use federal aid, over
allegations of poor-quality
programs.
GWEN IFILL: On Wall Street
today, the Dow
Jones industrial average gained
46 points
to close at 18538.
The Nasdaq rose 26 points, and
the S&P 500
added six.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And American
conservatives
today marked the passing of a
powerful voice,
Phyllis Schlafly.
She died yesterday, after more
than half-a-century
of activism on major social
issues.
PHYLLIS SCHLAFLY, Conservative
Activist: The
Equal Rights Amendment is a dead
issue now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Phyllis Schlafly
was one of
the leading conservative
firebrands of her
time, especially on the role of
women in American
society.
She rose to prominence in the
early 1960s
with a manifesto for the right,
A Choice,
Not an Echo.
It helped boost Senator Barry
Goldwater to
the top of the 1964 Republican
presidential
ticket.
A decade later, Schlafly led the
drive to
defeat the Equal Rights
Amendment, or ERA.
It would have barred gender
discrimination,
but Schlafly warned it wouldn't
stop there.
PHYLLIS SCHLAFLY: And it is the
position of
the advocates of the Equal
Rights Amendment
that they don't want it unless
they get, in
the same package, abortion,
abortion funding,
gay rights, drafting women.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Schlafly said she
was defending
what she called the real rights
of women,
including the right to be in the
home as a
wife and a mother.
She and her Eagle Forum also
became a force
on other social issues,
opposition to abortion
chief among them.
PHYLLIS SCHLAFLY: The Republican
Party must
keep the pro-life plank in the
platform and
must reject any language in the
text or in
the preamble that will be
perceived by the
press and the public as watering
down our
1984 and '88 platforms.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And she remained
active into
old age, even appearing at a
rally in march
for Donald Trump.
Phyllis Schlafly died of cancer
at her Saint
Louis home yesterday.
She was 92 years old.
And still to come on the
"NewsHour": Tim Kaine
discusses his role in the
homestretch of the
presidential campaign; a promise
to clear
unexploded bombs left in Laos
since the Vietnam
War; FOX News settles a sexual
harassment
suit with Gretchen Carlson; and
much more.
GWEN IFILL: For more on the race
for the White
House, we turn now to Hillary
Clinton's running
mate, Virginia Senator Tim
Kaine.
Before becoming senator in 2013,
Kaine served
as governor and lieutenant
governor of Virginia
and mayor of Richmond.
Judy sat down with Mike Pence
during the Republican
National Convention.
I spoke with Tim Kaine earlier
today after
he delivered a national security
speech.
Welcome, Senator Kaine.
SEN.
TIM KAINE (D-VA), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
You bet, Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: From our account,
listening to
your speech just now, you
mentioned Donald
Trump 57 times and Hillary
Clinton 29 times.
Are you the Hillary Clinton
defender in this
campaign or the Donald Trump
attacker?
SEN.
TIM KAINE: Well, I'm not a
Hillary Clinton
defender.
I'm a Hillary Clinton promoter.
And I am also drawing a sharp
contrast with
Donald Trump, because on this
issue of national
security, the power of the
president, as commander
in chief and as the nation's
chief diplomat,
the differences are incredibly
stark and very,
very important.
GWEN IFILL: Let me ask you
something about
something your Republican
counterpart, Mike
Pence, had to say about your
running mate.
He said that Secretary Clinton
is the most
dishonest candidate for
president since Richard
Nixon.
Here's your chance to promote.
SEN.
TIM KAINE: Hillary Clinton is
somebody who
has had a passion for families
and children
since she was a kid, in a
Methodist youth
group as a teenager in the
suburbs of Chicago.
And what I tell people, Gwen, is
this.
If you want to know about the
character of
somebody in public life, look to
see if they
have a passion that has animated
them throughout
their life, whether they were in
office or
out, whether they were winning
elections or
losing them.
And Hillary Clinton has that, a
passion to
empower families and kids, and a
desire to
measure health of society by how
families
and kids are doing.
You can see this from her
service as a lawyer,
first lady of Arkansas, and
United States
senator, and secretary of state.
And I draw that contrast with a
Donald Trump.
What's the passion that has
animated his life,
other than Donald Trump?
And there really isn't one.
And so that is the important
definition, in
my view, of character in public
life.
Can you count on somebody?
Do you know what motivates them?
And with Hillary Clinton, I
think that's very,
very plain.
GWEN IFILL: Why would Mike Pence
say something
like that?
SEN.
TIM KAINE: You know, I'm not
going to pretend
to understand why he would say
it.
I think the Nixon analogy is an
interesting
one, because when Mike Pence
mentions Nixon,
here's what I think of.
Richard Nixon, under audit,
released his tax
returns, so that the American
public could
look at them and know what his
financial situation
was, whether he was following
the law, and
whether he was beholden to
anybody.
Donald Trump promised in 2014
that, if he
ran for president, he would do
the same, but
he's not even willing to do what
Richard Nixon
did.
And then the second thing I
think about when
I hear about Richard Nixon is,
Richard Nixon
was a Republican presidential
candidate who
encouraged crooks to commit
espionage against
the Democratic National
Committee in order
to gain an edge in a
presidential election.
And that forged a constitutional
crisis, an
impeachment and a resignation.
Donald Trump has encouraged
Russians to cyber-hack
the United States to give him an
edge in an
election.
And that just shows how serious
and seriously
misguided Donald Trump is.
GWEN IFILL: What evidence do you
have to support
the notion that Donald Trump
directly, other
than that one comment that he
made, but that
he's been in touch with
Russians, has had
a direct connection with them to
urge them
to affect a United States
election?
SEN.
TIM KAINE: That is the evidence,
Gwen, that
he publicly -- not privately --
publicly encouraged
in a press conference during the
Democratic
Convention in Philadelphia
Russian hackers
to get involved and try to find
information
that would help him win the
race.
That's the evidence.
And he repeated it, and then,
when he was
confronted with it, he suddenly
said, well,
he was just being sarcastic.
But anybody who would joke about
that, about
espionage committed by the
Russians against
the United States to help him in
an election,
that was an example of Donald
Trump showing
us who he is.
And if he thinks that's funny,
then he has
a sense of humor unlike anybody
I have ever
met.
GWEN IFILL: But that doesn't
necessarily show
-- that shows him maybe if he
thinks he's
being funny.
That doesn't necessarily show
that he was
in cahoots with the Russians,
does it?
SEN.
TIM KAINE: No, but it shows --
again, it shows
he is publicly encouraging them
to do it.
And then we know, Gwen, that
he's also -- there's
a series of questions about
business deals
that he had -- has with Russia
or Russian
interests that could well be
disclosed if
he disclosed his tax returns,
which he won't.
In an extraordinary,
extraordinary turn of
events, his longtime adviser and
campaign
chair had to step down within
the last month
because of very, very
questionable ties to
pro-Russian elements in Russia
and the Ukraine,
including allegations of
undisclosed payments
of cash to affect Ukrainian
elections.
There are a series of
connections between
Donald Trump and his closest
advisers and
Russia that at least raise
significant questions.
Some of those questions could be
answered
if Donald Trump was willing to
release his
tax returns, but he's unwilling
to do that.
And when you add that to his
public encouragement
of Russia, it's got to raise
questions in
people's minds.
GWEN IFILL: You see the polls as
much as I
do, Senator, so you know that
there's a wide
gulf of distrust that Americans
feel towards
your running mate.
Even Joe Biden came out today
and said Hillary
Clinton has got to open her
hearts to Americans.
She's, obviously, been in the
eye for a long
time.
What do you think that she has
to do and what
has to be done between now and
November 8
for your ticket to make the case
for her,
instead of the case against
Donald Trump?
SEN.
TIM KAINE: Yes, and we are
making the case
for her, Gwen.
I'm passionate about that,
especially on these
national security issues.
We just have to make it every
day in the states
that really count.
Yesterday, I was in Pennsylvania
and Ohio,
states that are close.
Today, I'm in North Carolina
making the case.
I was campaigning with Hillary
in Ohio yesterday.
And so we're going to make our
case on these
issues, who is best suited to
grow an economy
that will work for all?
And then the issue of the day,
who is best
suited to be the commander in
chief, be our
chief diplomat, and also the
person who has
the nuclear codes and the
control of the American
military?
This is just deeply, deeply
important, and
we think when we make that case,
the American
public will be clear on who's
most fit to
be president.
And that's Hillary Clinton.
GWEN IFILL: As you travel making
that case
through all these battleground
states you
just named, do you find that
voters are more
driven by national security
issues, like you
talked about today, economic
security issues?
In either case, Donald Trump
seems to be leading
in most recent polls.
SEN.
TIM KAINE: Well, I think people
are very focused
on the economic issues.
They want an economy that works
for everybody.
And, actually, we're feeling
good about polls
we're seeing.
Some different polls came out
today in different
directions.
But in the battleground states,
like North
Carolina, we're in there.
We're feeling good.
The top choice that people want
to ask about
is, who's going to create an
economy that
does work for all?
But the national security issues
are very
important for two reasons.
First, because everybody knows
that we want
to be safe.
But, secondly, people see these
issues as
probably the clearest window
into somebody's
temperament, their judgment,
whether they're
steady or volatile.
And so the national security
issues are a
really good window into the
character of the
person that somebody wants to
have as commander
in chief.
And we think those questions
show off Hillary
Clinton's strengths and her
experience very,
very well.
GWEN IFILL: Why does it seem
like independents
are leaning towards Donald
Trump?
SEN.
TIM KAINE: You know, again, I
see polls, like
in Virginia and other states,
where we're
doing very, very well with
independents.
And so, again, on the polling
side, I see
polls are close.
But in the battleground states
that matter,
you know, just Virginia --
Virginia was assumed
to be one of the closest and
most important
battleground states going into
this election.
We like what we see in Virginia.
We like what we see in North
Carolina.
We like what we see in
Pennsylvania and Ohio.
These are states that are going
to be close,
but, right now, we like what we
see.
GWEN IFILL: Let me ask you
another question
about something Donald Trump had
to say over
the weekend.
He said that Hillary Clinton
didn't look presidential.
And then he was asked about
that, and he didn't
quite answer what he meant.
What do you think he meant?
SEN.
TIM KAINE: Well, Gwen, I will
quote it precisely.
He said: "Hillary Clinton
doesn't look presidential,
does she, fellows?
Does she, fellows?"
And, to me, I didn't have a hard
time figuring
out what that meant.
He was basically saying that,
because she's
a woman, that she somehow didn't
meet his
standard of what a president
looks like.
And I think that is very, very
easily understood
by the vast majority of people
who heard him
make that comment, and they find
it offensive.
GWEN IFILL: Does it help or hurt
you when
there are veiled or unveiled
comments referring
to your running mate's gender?
SEN.
TIM KAINE: Well, you know,
whether it helps
or hurts us, it's bad for our
country, because
we live in a country where we
put our North
Star out there in 1776 and said
that North
Star was going to be equality.
It took us 144 years to make the
decision
that that meant women could even
vote.
And now we're 96 years after
that, and thank
goodness we have broken a glass
ceiling and
a major party has nominated a
woman for president.
But for Donald Trump to suggest
-- and he's
suggested it before -- that, for
some reason,
Hillary Clinton couldn't cross
over the hurdle
because of her gender, when we
have stated
that our principle is the
equality principle,
and nations around the world
have been able
to elect women as heads of
state, I think
that shows that he's living in a
different
time, a time that is not a match
for what
Americans now believe about who
our leaders
should be.
GWEN IFILL: Senator Tim Kaine,
the Democratic
vice presidential nominee, thank
you very
much for joining us.
SEN.
TIM KAINE: Thanks so much, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we reported
earlier, President
Obama is now in Laos, the small
Southeast
Asian nation where the United
States dropped
millions of tons of bombs during
the Vietnam
War.
We stated at the top of the
program that Mr.
Obama apologized, but he stopped
short of
a formal diplomatic apology
expressing regret.
In a speech this morning, Mr.
Obama said the
U.S. would now increase funding
to help clear
the bombs that still maim and
kill.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Many of the bombs that were
dropped were never
exploded.
Over the years, thousands of
Laotians have
been killed or injured, farmers
tending their
fields, children playing.
The wounds, a missing leg or
arm, last a lifetime.
And that's why, as president, I
have dramatically
increased our funding to help
remove these
unexploded bombs.
As a result, Laos is clearing
more bombs,
fewer Laotians are being hurt or
killed, and,
together, we are saving lives.
Given our history here, I
believe that the
United States has a moral
obligation to help
Laos heal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now special
correspondent Mike
Cerre reports from Laos on the
American effort
to clean up this deadly legacy.
MIKE CERRE: A Lao grandfather
who lost his
left hand in 1964 to a UXO,
unexploded ordnance,
pointing out injuries to his
three grandsons
from a UXO from the same war.
WOMAN: Two of the fingers were
cut off.
MIKE CERRE: The war may have
ended here in
Laos 40-plus years ago, but the
casualties
of war continue on places like
this soccer
field, where some kids just two
weeks ago
found a little bomblet.
They thought it was a ball and
took it home
to play with.
Despite official U.S. government
denials and
downplaying during the Vietnam
War from 1964
to '73, the United States
dropped more bombs
per person on Laos than have
been dropped
on any country in the world in
any war.
The U.S. Defense Department
estimates as much
as two million tons of ordnance
were dropped
on Laos, much of it focused on
the Ho Chi
Minh Trail that paralleled the
Vietnamese
border.
The North Vietnamese used the
trail network
to transport troops and supplies
into South
Vietnam, where American troops
were fighting.
It was part of the secret war
conducted in
Laos, which remained secret
until one determined
American aid worker made it
public.
MAN: There is a good deal of
evidence to suggest
that the United States has been
carrying out
the most protracted bombing of
civilian targets
in history in Laos.
MIKE CERRE: While working in
Laos as an educational
adviser in 1969, Fred Branfman
was struck
by the number of refugees
fleeing the countryside
into the capital, Vientiane, at
the height
of the secret war.
FRED BRANFMAN, ®MD-BO /Anti-War
Activist:
I estimated at one point that I
had interviewed
over 2,000 Laotians.
Every single one, every single
one, without
exception, said that his or her
village had
been destroyed by bombing.
MIKE CERRE: He also asked the
refugees to
draw pictures of the bombing,
which he used
in his testimony.
CHANNAPHA KHAMVONGSA, Legacies
of War: So
these were accounts of people
who actually
lived under the air war.
And at this point, nobody
outside of Laos
had known what was happening.
MIKE CERRE: Channapha Khamvongsa
is a Laos
American who left Laos in 1979
with her family
when she was 7 and was raised in
Virginia.
She left her job at the Ford
Foundation 12
years ago, after she first saw
the refugees'
drawings, to start a foundation
of her own
to deal with these dangerous
legacies of the
war.
More than 20,000 people have
been killed or
maimed since the war's end.
CHANNAPHA KHAMVONGSA: What I
realized as I
got older is that America left
behind such
a dark legacy here.
I felt compelled to do what I
can to help
remove the millions of bombs
that are still
left over from the war.
MIKE CERRE: According to the
Defense Department's
estimates, 20 to 30 percent of
the bombs dropped
over Laos didn't go off as
designed, whether
that be for a technical
malfunction or having
fallen into a soft rice paddy.
Either way, 25 percent of the
country now
is still contaminated by UXOs.
CHANNAPHA KHAMVONGSA: Since
1973, there have
been four deaths here.
This particular field is going
to be used
for agriculture purposes, to
grow fruit trees.
But he came across too many
bombies.
And so he made a request to UXO
Lao to clear
the land.
The last two days that they have
worked here,
they have been 42 bombies found
already.
MIKE CERRE: Bombies are the
baseball-size
explosives packed by the
hundreds into larger
cluster bombs designed to open
in midair,
raining the smaller
anti-personnel bombs filled
with ball bearings and other
shrapnel over
wide swathes of land.
CHANNAPHA KHAMVONGSA: About 270
million were
originally dropped of the
cluster munitions.
And an estimate of 80 million
still remain
on the land.
Obviously, we still have a lot
more to go.
But for the villagers here, it's
so important
that their land gets cleared.
MIKE CERRE: UXO Lao is one of
several ordnance
removal operations that receive
U.S. funding
to find and safely remove UXOs
throughout
the country.
CHANNAPHA KHAMVONGSA: I think
one of the challenges
to clearing the Ho Chi Minh
Trail has just
been, again, awareness and
attention.
There has been clearance over
the last 15
years.
But we just need more resources.
MIKE CERRE: Daniel Clune, the
U.S. ambassador
to Laos, believes the
improvement of UXO clearance
protocols is one the reasons the
U.S. will
be spending more on remediation
efforts here.
DANIEL CLUNE, U.S. Ambassador to
Laos: The
substantial increase that the
president has
announced for UXO clearance in
Laos from roughly
$15 million a year to $30
million a year,
a doubling, is very significant.
MIKE CERRE: Have we ever paid
reparations
for the bombing that we
conducted here?
DANIEL CLUNE: We have a
responsibility to
clear the unexploded ordnance
that we left
here during the war.
And this is not to make a
judgment one way
or the other about what happened
here and
who was at fault and who wasn't
at fault.
It's simply a question of young
children being
injured or killed as the result
of ordnance
that was dropped here in a war
that happened
40 years ago.
CHANNAPHA KHAMVONGSA: I mean,
President Obama
being here is historic, and it's
the first
a U.S. president to visit here.
And so we're, I think, elated
that he's going
to bring greater visibility to
this issue.
We're hardly done.
Even a doubling is not going to
solve this
problem overnight.
And it's going to take the next
administration
and maybe even the next, the one
after, to
really address this issue.
MIKE CERRE: All agree that no
amount of money,
resources or time could ever
find every unexploded
bomb in Laos.
Ordnance from both World Wars is
still being
found in Europe.
The primary objective here is to
make Laos
safe by focusing UXO efforts on
areas of known
contamination in the more
populated areas
and educating Laos on what to
look for and
who to call when they find
something.
Emma Atkinson is the State
Department's program
manager for weapons removal in
Southeast Asia.
EMMA ATKINSON, State Department:
Right now,
we have got about 85 percent of
our funding
that goes to surveying clearance
activities,
with the remainder 15 percent
being split
between survivors assistance and
risk education.
MIKE CERRE: Channapha's
Washington based Legacies
of War Foundation, funded
largely by other
Lao-Americans, helps the State
Department
identify the local needs and the
mix of local
and mostly international
organizations working
on them, from victims
assistance, to counseling
and job training.
CHANNAPHA KHAMVONGSA: I think
the Americans
obviously knew a lot about
Vietnam and Cambodia.
Some might have heard about
Laos, but I don't
think they know about the
history of U.S.
involvement here, and in
particular about
the secret war.
I think very few are aware that
millions of
bombs are still maiming and
killing Laotians
today.
And that's what we're really
concerned about.
®MD+IT /MD-IT /MIKE CERRE:
Another group
is using soccer to teach local
kids how to
identify UXOs, especially the
small bomblets,
which can be easily confused
with the balls
they can play with, as this
third generation
of UXO victims mistakenly did,
with tragic
consequences.
CHANNAPHA KHAMVONGSA: As long as
the U.S.
continues to remain committed by
sustaining
and increase its funding as
needed, I think
we will be able to address this
issue hopefully
in our lifetime.
MIKE CERRE: For the "PBS
NewsHour," Mike Cerre
reporting from Xiangkhouang
Province, Laos.
GWEN IFILL: And staying with the
president's
trip to Asia, we look at a flash
point created
with Mr. Obama by the new
president of the
Philippines.
It's not only Rodrigo Duterte's
blunt, often
profane style, but how those
words have led
to a mounting body count on the
streets of
his country.
William Brangham reports.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: President
Rodrigo Duterte
arrived at the ASEAN Summit in
Laos with his
staff in full-damage control
mode.
A day earlier, Duterte used a
profanity about
President Obama, warning him not
to raise
the recent mass killings of drug
suspects
in the Philippines.
MARTIN ANDANAR, Philippine
Presidential Communications
Operations Secretary: President
Duterte explained
that the press reports that the
-- President
Obama would lecture him on
extrajudicial killings
led to his strong comments,
which in turn
elicited concern.
He regrets that his remarks to
the press have
caused much controversy.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But the damage
was done.
The White House had already
canceled a meeting
between the presidents at the
summit.
All of this centers on the new
leader's war
on drugs.
Since he took office at the end
of June, more
than 2,000 people have been
killed by state
police, and by vigilantes, in a
sweeping crackdown.
RODRIGO DUTERTE, Philippine
President: Plenty
will be killed until the last
pusher is out
of the streets.
Until the drug manufacturer is
killed, we
will continue, and I will
continue.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In addition to
the killings,
hundreds of people have
surrendered to authorities.
Reactions in the Philippines
sharply divided.
Some Filipinos say they support
the president's
efforts.
WOMAN (through translator): oh,
yes, there
are far fewer addicts now.
He's really good.
Duterte is doing a good job.
It's really good for our
country.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But there have
also been
protests against this wave of
violence.
Some came last week, when
vigilantes accidentally
killed a drug dealer's
5-year-old granddaughter.
WOMAN (through translator): All
of us want
to eradicate illegal drugs, but
it should
be done through due process.
The president should understand
that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Many outside
of the Philippines
have expressed concerns as well,
chief among
the critics, the United States
and the United
Nations.
Last month, U.N. human rights
experts said
that claiming you're fighting
illegal drugs
doesn't shield you from
responsibility for
illegal killings.
In response to the criticism,
Duterte threatened
to pull the Philippines out of
the U.N.
RODRIGO DUTERTE: I do not want
to insult you,
but maybe we will just have to
decide to separate
from the United Nations.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And, today,
after arriving
at the summit, the Philippines
president declared
his country will not be cowed.
It's also clear that his often
profane style
isn't going away.
In addition to President Obama,
he's lashed
out at Filipino judges and
senators, Pope
Francis, and U.N.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon.
Last month, he went after the
U.S. ambassador
to the Philippines, Philip
Goldberg, who'd
criticized him during the
Philippines presidential
campaign.
RODRIGO DUTERTE (through
translator): I had
a fight with their ambassador,
that gay son
of a (EXPLETIVE DELETED).
He annoys me.
He was meddling in the
elections, giving statements
here and there.
You weren't supposed to do that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Tomorrow, both
Duterte and
President Obama will attend a
gala dinner
at the ASEAN Summit.
It's unclear if they will speak
to each other.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham
in Washington, D.C.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": 15
years after
9/11, combating a different kind
of terrorism
online; and the benefits of
teaching math
to 3-year-olds.
But, first: fallout from the
sexual harassment
cases involving FOX News and its
former chief,
Roger Ailes.
Parent company 21st Century Fox
announced
a settlement today with former
FOX News anchor
Gretchen Carlson.
Carlson had charged Ailes and
others at FOX
with harassing her starting back
in 2009.
Multiple sources say that
Carlson will receive
$20 million, and that FOX has
settled other
lawsuits.
FOX also issued an apology to
Carlson as part
of the deal.
It read -- quote -- "We
sincerely regret and
apologize for the fact that
Gretchen wasn't
treated with the respect and
dignity that
she and all of our colleagues
deserve."
For more, I'm joined by Stephen
Battaglio
of The Los Angeles Times.
He's in Chicago.
Steve Battaglio, thank you for
being with
us.
Remind us first, in brief, what
was it that
Gretchen Carlson alleged?
STEPHEN BATTAGLIO, The Los
Angeles Times:
Gretchen Carlson was on FOX News
for 11 years,
first on the FOX morning show,
and then she
had an afternoon show of her
own.
Her contract wasn't renewed in
June of this
year.
And shortly after that, she
filed a lawsuit
in which she said that Roger
Ailes sabotaged
her career and retaliated
against her because
she rebuffed him when he made
comments of
a sexual nature in meetings that
they had
had.
She also said that he was
punishing her because
she complained about a hostile
work environment.
She wasn't happy with her --
with how her
co-anchors treated her when she
was on "FOX
& Friends."
And she had very detailed
statements talking
about things that Roger had said
to her of
a sexual nature, inappropriate,
and that's
what takes us to where we are
today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And he, of
course, initially
denied all of this, but now with
this settlement,
essentially, the company is
saying, as we
just read, we're sorry, and
acknowledging
that at least a lot of this is
true?
STEPHEN BATTAGLIO: Well, not
only is the settlement
large, but the apology is
extraordinary.
It is very rare when companies
settle with
employees that they actually
admit wrongdoing
and apologize like this.
It almost never happens in
sexual harassment
cases.
It's probably guaranteed that
Gretchen Carlson
required this as part of the
terms for the
settlement, that she be -- that
it would be
acknowledged that this was how
she was treated.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, $20 million,
as you said,
it's a huge amount of money for
this kind
of lawsuit.
There was some reporting today
that Roger
Ailes himself would be liable
for some of
that.
Is there any confirmation of
that?
STEPHEN BATTAGLIO: I don't think
there's any
truth to it.
Roger Ailes was indemnified by
FOX.
He left FOX News with a $40
million severance
package.
I don't think, when they
negotiated that package,
they said, here, Roger, here's
$40 million,
but you may have to give some of
that back
if we settle the lawsuit.
I don't think that's the case.
I think that 21st Century Fox
paid all of
this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stephen
Battaglio, what does
it say that FOX decided to
settle this and
at this amount?
STEPHEN BATTAGLIO: It says that
they wanted
to avoid a trial, which would
have made this
an ongoing story for months,
perhaps years.
This is all that people in the
New York media
circles in New York and
Washington have been
talking about.
It's an ongoing story.
The details get more sordid.
More women come forward.
More charges are made.
Some may not be true, but it
just gets thrown
into the pot, and it's just --
and I think
that the Murdochs, the owners of
21st Century
Fox, want to get past this.
They want to take FOX News into
the post-Roger
Ailes era.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we know that
there are
other allegations that have been
out there
regarding Ailes and potentially
others at
FOX.
What's the status of those other
potential
cases?
STEPHEN BATTAGLIO: I'm told that
the -- that
the complaints that came forward
during the
investigation of Carlson's
complaints have
been settled, and there is a
three-year statute
of limitations on sexual
harassment complaints
in New York state.
So, other people may issue
complaints, but
if they're not within that
window, they can't
go forward to litigation.
So they think they're covered
there.
There is one other case
involving another
FOX News host, Andrea Tantaros.
FOX says that she wasn't
sexually harassed
and that she was suspended
because of a breach
in contract, or that she's in
breach of her
contract.
And they feel that that's a
separate issue,
and they will go to court with
that one, if
they need to.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you think
the effect
of this is on FOX News, on its
fortunes as
a news organization?
STEPHEN BATTAGLIO: The bad news
has certainly
not affected its ratings.
It's been the number one network
in all of
cable, not just FOX News, pretty
much the
entire summer, week after week.
They own a certain part of the
audience, a
part of the news audience who
doesn't feel
that conservative views are
fairly represented
in the rest of the press.
That's a niche that they own.
And it's very dependable for
them.
And a lot of those people
probably don't care
about this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally,
what do you think
-- what effect do you think this
has on the
culture of television news,
television entertainment,
a culture that would have
permitted something
like this at FOX to happen?
STEPHEN BATTAGLIO: Well, you're
actually talking
about the culture of Roger
Ailes.
You have to remember, Roger
comes from another
era of show business, when the
casting couch
was very common, where it wasn't
unusual for
an executive or a producer to
say, young lady,
if you spend some special time
with me, it
will be very good for your
career.
I think that was pretty common
in the 1960s
and 1970s.
And I think that stayed with
Roger until today,
where it is not appropriate,
acceptable, or
legal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We certainly hope
it's not
acceptable anywhere.
Stephen Battaglio, we thank you
very much
with The Los Angeles Times.
STEPHEN BATTAGLIO: Thanks for
having me.
GWEN IFILL: This coming weekend
marks 15 years
since the 9/11 attacks.
We will spend time in the coming
days showing
how the U.S. is pursuing its
campaign against
terrorism, also the state of the
war in Afghanistan
and the lives of its people.
But we begin first with the
first of a two-part
series from Miles O'Brien on the
technological
evolution of terrorism and those
who fight
it.
It's the focus of the film he
produced for
the PBS program "NOVA"
premiering tomorrow
night, "15 Years of Terror."
Tonight, an inside look at the
changing face
of counterterrorism.
MILES O'BRIEN: This is the room
9/11 built,
the operations center at the
National Counterterrorism
Center just outside Washington,
D.C.
NICK RASMUSSEN, Director,
National Counterterrorism
Center: On a 24/7 basis, we have
officers
here working in shifts who are
consuming,
reading, analyzing, and
assessing every bit
of available information that
there is to
try to figure out what terrorist
threats are
aimed at the United States.
MILES O'BRIEN: Nick Rasmussen is
the director
here.
The agency itself, and this room
in particular,
were created to encourage the
myriad of intelligence,
military and law enforcement
organizations
involved in national security to
share classified
information.
This is where they try to
connect the dots.
NICK RASMUSSEN: So, there are
probably officers
at NCTC from 17 or 18 different
government
organizations all across the
government.
Basically, every three- or
four-letter agency
that you could probably name, we
probably
have somebody here at NCTC
serving from that
organization on a one- or two-
or three-year
assignment.
MILES O'BRIEN: The nature of the
work here
has changed dramatically in
recent years.
MAN: These folks can get
radicalized by one
group and the baton can be
passed to another
group.
WOMAN: The FBI had this man on
its radar as
early as 2013.
MILES O'BRIEN: More lone wolves,
fewer face-to-face
meetings and phone calls, the
Internet as
a source of inspiration and
planning.
MAN: Self-radicalization doesn't
have to take
many months or many years.
NICK RASMUSSEN: Increasingly,
what connecting
the dots means to me is dealing
with the huge,
huge volume of publicly
available or open
source or unclassified
information that's
out there that may have
terrorism relevance.
And the work we're doing now
with our partners
in the intelligence community
often doesn't
involve really, really sensitive
intelligence.
It involves looking at Twitter
or looking
at some other social media
platform and trying
to figure out who that
individual behind that
screen name, behind that handle
might actually
be and whether that person poses
a threat
to the United States.
MILES O'BRIEN: The term of art
in the world
of espionage is SOCMINT, social
media intelligence,
open source spying.
JEFF WEYERS, Intelligence
Analyst: Anybody
can track a war online, can
track a terrorist
group online, can develop
informants and contacts
online.
MILES O'BRIEN: Intelligence
analyst Jeff Weyers
is expert at gleaning
intelligence from social
media.
His operations center is his
living room.
The data is hiding in plain
view.
All it takes is patience,
persistence and
a little bit of technical
know-how to find
it.
For instance, many Islamic State
fighters
do not disable the geographic
tracking capability
built into their mobile phones.
JEFF WEYERS: Some, I think, do
it by error,
so that they don't realize that
their phone
is broadcasting the information,
or they simply
don't care.
So, when we look at Raqqa and
Mosul over the
last year, there was lots of
content, lots
of geolocated content coming out
of those
areas.
MILES O'BRIEN: The technology
makes it easy
for anyone to track a terrorist.
JEFF WEYERS: If he broadcasts
from Raqqa,
and then I again see him in
Turkey, and then
I again see him moving into
Europe, well,
this is a way that we can
potentially interdict
with somebody that may be
looking to do an
attack.
MILES O'BRIEN: That, combined
with some selfies,
might provide plenty of
intelligence needed
for targeting.
JEFF WEYERS: If you are looking
for a drone
attack, and you're seeing where
they're going
for morning coffee, Twitter
could tell you.
MILES O'BRIEN: When it comes to
terror, the
problem isn't a lack of data.
It is separating the wheat from
the chaff.
NICK RASMUSSEN: If you look at
the Orlando
shooting or Baton Rouge or the
recent cases
in Germany and France, just
because the government
has all this data doesn't mean
they have the
capacity to analyze all that
data.
So, how do you then go and make
a determination
as to whether that person poses
a threat to
the public.
MILES O'BRIEN: With so many
electronic bread
crumbs scattered out in the
open, couldn't
it be possible for computer
scientists to
harness the right combination of
software
and hardware to find them...
TOM CRUISE, Actor: All right,
Howard Marks,
where are you?
MILES O'BRIEN: ... and make
pre-crime arrests,
as depicted in the 2002 movie
"Minority Report."
TOM CRUISE: I'm placing you
under arrest for
the future murder of Sarah Marks
and Donald
Dubin that was to take place
today, April
22, at 0800 hours.
MILES O'BRIEN: Provocative, dark
science fiction
now, but maybe not forever.
At the University of Maryland,
computer scientist
V.S.
Subrahmanian is applying a big
data approach
to fighting terror.
He is trying to put more
objective analysis
into decisions about which
terrorists to target.
V.S.
SUBRAHMANIAN, University of
Maryland: I'm
a scientist, and when somebody
says we degraded
al-Qaida by taking person X out,
if I can't
measure it, I don't believe it.
MILES O'BRIEN: He and his team
focused on
the Islamic terror organization
Lashkar-e-Taiba,
the group responsible for the
2008 attacks
on Mumbai, a dozen coordinated
shootings and
bombings lasting four days that
killed more
than 160 people.
V.S.
SUBRAHMANIAN: So, what you see
here is the
terrorist network corresponding
to the terrorist
group, Lashkar-e-Taiba.
And each node that you see here
corresponds
to an individual.
MILES O'BRIEN: They compiled 21
years of data
on the group and its actions.
All of it is fed into some
sophisticated software,
an algorithm, that he calls
STONE, for Shaping
Terrorist Organization Network
Efficacy.
It's a schematic of a terrorist
network, identifying
individuals, subgroups and
affiliations.
The software assigns a number to
measure the
lethality of the terror
organization, the
higher the number, the more
dangerous the
group is.
V.S.
SUBRAHMANIAN: Let's take a look
at the leader
of the group here, number one.
If you right-click on him, we
will see some
information about him.
MILES O'BRIEN: He is Hafiz
Muhammad Saeed,
a man with a $10 million bounty
on his head.
V.S.
SUBRAHMANIAN: Let's pretend we
are in the
role of an analyst and we're
considering the
consequences of targeting him
and removing
him from the network.
MILES O'BRIEN: Here's what
surprising: The
software predicts, if you take
out the boss,
the lethality of the terror
group actually
goes up.
V.S.
SUBRAHMANIAN: You may be faced
with a situation
where the new leader is either
much more aggressive
about carrying out operations or
much better
liked or much more competent in
carrying out
those operations.
MILES O'BRIEN: But what would
happen if Saeed's
three top deputies were all
taken out?
The number goes way down.
Lashkar-e-Taiba becomes much
less of a threat.
V.S.
SUBRAHMANIAN: You can have a
much more efficient
counterterrorism operation that
significantly
weakens a group by targeting
just the right
people.
MILES O'BRIEN: So, could the
same software
one day predict an attack?
Is it possible to identify
surefire signals
of trouble ahead?
Sort of.
V.S.
SUBRAHMANIAN: We could have
predicted the
Mumbai attacks.
However, we could not have
predicted exactly
where they would have occurred.
So, we can say things like, we
expect these
kinds of targets to be hit in
the next one,
two, three, four months, but we
cannot say,
this specific target will be hit
in the next
one, two, three, four months.
MILES O'BRIEN: Not as accurate
as a hurricane
prediction, but human nature may
be the perfect
storm of unpredictability.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," College
Park, Maryland.
GWEN IFILL: And tune in tomorrow
night, when
Miles continues his look at the
efforts to
stem the tide of terrorism
online and asks
what social media platforms can
and should
do.
You can watch his entire film,
"9/11: 15 Years
of Terror," on "NOVA" Wednesday
night.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Students in
Boston are heading
back to the classroom this week,
where the
school district's youngest
learners are taking
on math in a whole new way.
Special correspondent Cat Wise
reports for
our weekly education segment,
Making the Grade.
WOMAN: Ready, go.
CHILDREN: One, two, three, four,
five.
CAT WISE: The scene may look
like indoor recess,
but these preschool students are
jumping joyfully
for a lesson in mathematics.
WOMAN: Who's getting warmed up
now?
CAT WISE: Even the teachers in
this Boston
public elementary are warming up
to the idea
of math instruction for 3-, 4-
and 5-year-olds.
WOMAN: Beautiful.
CAT WISE: Sara Gardner teaches
pre-kindergarten
at Edward Everett School.
SARA GARDNER, Edward Everett
School: The curriculum
activities, they're fun.
They're fun.
And as a teacher, you really get
to dig deeply
into the development of math and
math ideas
in young kids.
CAT WISE: Boston schools have
adopted a curriculum
called Building Blocks, which
encourages kids
to think about and discuss math
concepts throughout
the day.
Linda Ruiz Davenport directs
math programs
for Boston Public Schools.
LINDA RUIZ DAVENPORT, Boston
Public Schools:
Getting young children involved
in mathematics
at an early age helps foster
their curiosity
about mathematics, particularly
mathematics
in their environment.
SARA GARDNER: All right, no
skipping, count
at one time.
All right?
CAT WISE: Here, Gardner has
students explain
math mistakes by their puppet,
Mr. Mix-Up.
SARA GARDNER: One, two, five,
six, nine, 11.
CHILDREN: No.
CHILD: You did it wrong.
SARA GARDNER: I don't understand
what I did,
though.
I don't understand.
CHILD: Like, you need to say,
the correct
words and correct names.
SARA GARDNER: Mr. Mix-Up, he is
making counting
errors, and so the children are
trying to
learn how to explain to him what
those errors
are as they're building up their
understanding
of the number system.
CAT WISE: Building Blocks was
designed by
early learning experts who say
math has been
largely ignored in the United
States, pushed
out by literacy, a subject some
refer to as
the bully of preschool
curriculum, because
it dominates the day.
DOUG CLEMENTS, University of
Denver: Research
shows that kindergarten mostly
is a mathematical
wasteland right now for kids.
In other words, kids knew that
stuff before
they walked into the
kindergarten door.
What are they learning?
Almost nothing.
CAT WISE: Doug Clements is an
early learning
expert at the University of
Denver and one
of the creators of Building
Blocks.
DOUG CLEMENTS: Early math is
surprisingly
important.
What kids know in their
preschool or entering
kindergarten year about
mathematics predicts
their later school success.
In mathematics, sure, that makes
sense, but
it even predicts later reading
success, as
well as early literacy skills
do.
Early math is cognitively
fundamental.
It's not just about number and
shapes.
There's reasoning and thinking
embedded in
what we do in early mathematics
that forms
a foundation for years to come.
SARA GARDNER: All right, watch
me.
How many now?
CHILDREN: Five.
SARA GARDNER: How do you know
it's five?
As they play this game, they
become quicker
and quicker at identifying
quantity, and seeing
quantity in different
arrangements.
How many are here?
CHILD: Six.
SARA GARDNER: Watch me.
How many now?
CHILD: Seven.
SARA GARDNER: Watch me.
How many now?
CHILD: Eight.
CAT WISE: University of Denver
professor Julie
Sarama is co-creator of Building
Blocks.
She's also an expert in
childhood learning
and is married to Doug Clements.
JULIE SARAMA, University of
Denver: Children
love talking about mathematics.
We go way beyond what's the
answer, to, how
did you think about that, how
did you get
that answer, what were you
thinking?
SARA GARDNER: How about these,
Maurice?
What are these?
How do you know they're
rectangles?
CHILD: Because they have four
sides.
SARA GARDNER: They have four
sides, but what
else?
CHILD: Right angles.
SARA GARDNER: Four right angles.
Oh, my goodness.
Give me a high-five.
CAT WISE: Comfortable as Sara
Gardner is with
her students, not all early
education teachers
embrace math.
JULIE SARAMA: You talk to them
as adults,
they will say, I never liked
math, I'm not
a math person.
CAT WISE: Susan Neuman, a
professor of early
literacy at New York University,
advises teams
of early education
teacher-coaches.
While the teacher she's
observing on this
day get high marks for her
style, Neuman describes
visiting other classrooms where
pre-K teachers
have struggled to teach even
basic math concepts.
SUSAN NEUMAN, New York
University: The teacher
actually said to the children, a
triangle
has three sizes, rather than
three sides.
And then the coach actually had
to go to the
blackboard and draw it, and show
that it had
three sides, rather than three
sizes.
Yet the teacher then repeated,
it has three
sizes.
CAT WISE: How important is the
teacher's own
comfort level with math when
they are teaching
math to preschoolers?
SUSAN NEUMAN: It's
extraordinarily important.
They have to feel comfortable,
but they also
have to like it.
They have to understand things
from an understanding
of not only the topic itself,
such as math,
but how children learns about
that topic.
CAT WISE: That was apparent at
this professional
development class sponsored by
Boston Public
Schools, where pre-K teacher
Stephanie Kudria-Shova
was learning how to teach the
Building Blocks
curriculum.
What is your own relationship
with math?
How do you view math?
STEPHANIE KUDRIA-SHOVA, Teacher:
Honestly,
I hate math.
My instructors would say,
Stephanie, don't
say that.
I have been working really hard
not to be
math-phobic, and coming to
workshops like
Building Blocks has helped me as
an adult.
CAT WISE: Do you think back on
your own childhood,
and your own education about
math, and think,
gosh, I wish I had learned this?
STEPHANIE KUDRIA-SHOVA: I wish
all the time.
And, today, you know, I actually
at one point
started getting nervous, and
sweating, because
they gave us something to do,
and I was like,
oh, no.
CAT WISE: You often hear about
fads in education.
School districts will be
rah-rah, spend a
lot of money implementing these
curriculums,
and then they fade out, for
whatever reason.
Is that a possibility here?
DOUG CLEMENTS: Yes, it's true,
curriculum
come and go.
Well, we have got to get away
from jumping
on the bandwagon, and then
jumping on a new
bandwagon.
Curriculum may go, but the
understandings,
the scientific research based
understanding
of how kids learn and how you
can best support
that learning should stay.
CAT WISE: Education experts are
now waiting
for new research, expected later
this year,
on the lasting impacts of early
math instruction.
In Boston, I'm Cat Wise for the
"PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: We trace the political
impasse in Congress
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: We trace the political
impasse in Congress
over funding to prevent and
fight the Zika
virus in the U.S.
That and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: Later tonight on
PBS, continuing
our coverage of 9/11 15 years
later, we air
a documentary focusing on the
events in and
around Washington that horrific
day; "9/11:
Inside the Pentagon" uses
first-hand accounts
and rarely seen footage to
describe what happened
after American Airlines Flight
77 slammed
into the Department of Defense.
MAN: From where I was standing,
you could
see these Navy personnel who had
come to help
pull people out of the damaged
area, which
was the Navy command center.
When a plane came to it, if you
can imagine,
a room full of partition
furniture, and you
have this force coming through
there, it's
taking all of that furniture and
people -- people
and everything.
Just horror popped out.
We were kind of in that area
where everything
had been shoved into.
GWEN IFILL: The hour-long
program premieres
tonight at 8:00 on most PBS
stations.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.